Exercises 02; Fundamentals – Cryptographic Security
0. Read chapter 3 “Cryptographic Security” pages 43-53. It is part of the curriculum.
    ✅

1. Can a real-life cipher have “unconditional security”? (explain)
    Yes, but that doesnt mean its a good cipher. 

2. What is a “computational Security”? (explain)
    Computational security is "can it be broken in a reasonable amount of time with reasonable resources?"

3. What is a (P,C)-pair? (explain)
    Plaintext Ciphertext pair. The text before and after encrypted with a cipher.

4. What is this: (t, ε)-secure?
        Mathematical expression of computational security. Book: A cryptographic scheme is (t, ε)-secure if an attacker performing at most t operations has a probability of success that is no higher than ε
    a. What is the t?
        the limit on the number of operations that an attacker will carry out
    b. What is the ε?
        the limit on the probability of success of an attack

5. Assume a key length of n=128-bit. Assume also that t=2^64. Is the cipher still secure? (explain)
    Yes, 2^64 is 1.8446744e+19 while 2^128 (the keyspace) is 3.4028237e+38, which is a way bigger number. 
    The chance of guessing the key correctly by brute force is 2^64 / 2^128 = 2^-64

6. Assume a key length of n=128-bit.
    a. Is is OK to say that the “security level” is 128-bit? (why/why not)
        Depends on the process to generate the key is exploitable or not. If its exploitable in some way, the security level may be lower-
    b. Can the security level be greater than the key length (in bits)? (why/why not)
        If the security level is expressed in relative terms, yes. For example, key A and key B. If key B requires more resources to try each key, you can quantify that as a higher security level relative to key A. 
        Copy paste from LLM:
            Suppose Cipher B takes 100 times longer per operation than Cipher A.
                2^128 B-operations.
            Since each B-operation costs the same as 100 A-operations.
                100×2^128
            Express 100 as a power of 2.
                100≈2^6.64
            And when multiplying powers of 2, you add the exponents:
                2^6.64+128 = 2^134.64
            So if we're measuring everything using Cipher A's operations:
                Cipher A attack ≈ 2^128 A-operations
                Cipher B attack ≈ 2^134.64 A-operations

7. The Hive Systems password table says a lot about the effect of parallelization:
    a. Do you have a “safe” password?
        Yes, my regular password puts me well into the green. My old password is orange. 

8. Precomputation
    a. Precomputation is (in large parts) a brute-force approach (true/false – explain)
        You can precompute outcomes before starting the attack and then look up the answers later. Its a brute force attack but just earlier in time.
    b. How does it differ from a standard brute-force approach? (explain, or refute the claim)
        Its similar in that its fundamentally trying lots of options. Its effectively trading storage space for time (during an attack).

9. Sensible security level?
    a. Why is 56, 64 or 80-bit security level considered insecure? (explain)
            They can be broken "relatively" easily by powerful computers.
        i. Are there any exceptions to the above?
            Yes, if the key expires quickly, the attacker wont have enough time to break the key before its invalid again.
    b. Why is 128-bit security level enough? (explain)
        2^128 is an insanely large number. 
        From the book:  To give you a sense of what this number means, consider the fact that the universe is approximately 288 nanoseconds old (there’s a billion nanoseconds in a second). 
                        Since testing a key with today’s technology takes no less than a nanosecond, you’d need several times the age of the universe for an attack to succeed (240 times, to be precise).
    c. What is the point of 256-bit security level? (explain)
        For future proofing. Currently we do not expect to be able to break 256 bit security for the forseeable future, even with quantum computing.
    d. Ok, but we can also imagine a 512-bit security level:
        i. Would this be useful and/or necessary? (explain)
                No, its incredibly overkill. 
            ii. What would be the drawbacks to this? (explain)
                Takes more resources to compute and deliver (cpu cycles, storage space, bandwidth, etc).

10. What is a “reduction” proof and how does it work (explain).
    A reduction proof is basically you saying "the only way to break my cipher is to solve this existing problem first and we are pretty sure the existing one is hard". 
    Its like piggybacking off an existing problem.

11. Mention at least one example of proofs relative to a mathematical problem.
    RSA uses the prime factoring problem. Finding the two primes that factor into a certain number gets really hard, and since RSA uses that, its at least as hard to compute as the prime factoring problem.

12. How hard is the baseline mathematical problem for RSA?
    If n is large enough, hard enough to be considered infeasable. 

13. What is a proof relative to a(nother) cryptographic problem?
        "the only way to break my cipher is to solve this existing cryptographic problem first and we are pretty sure the existing one is hard"
    a. Give an example
        If the encryption algorithm uses RSA, i can say that you need to break RSA to break my algorithm as well.

14. AES is one of the most widely used cipher algorithm in the world today.
    a. Are there any proofs for AES? (explain)
        No. We are pretty sure AES is secure becuase many skilled people have tried and failed to break it.
        This is called heuristic security. The ones above are called provable Security.

15. What is a TVP? (explain)
    There is nothing in the book about this and nothing seems correct on google.
    Im going to guess something related to timestamps. Can be useful to set when a key will expire or as a seed of some sort. It can also be useful for both parties to know when x thing will happen.

16. If you need uniqueness, which TVP type is adequate? (explain)
    There is nothing in the book about this and nothing seems correct on google.
    The unix time counts up from the unix epoch. Its always going to be unique.

17. Timestamps have advantages, but they also have disadvantages. Can you elucidate on both the advantages and disadvantages?
    They are guaranteed unique and fresh by each second (or ms depending on who you ask), and very easy to retrieve. 
    But they are extremely predictable and rely on both parties having a clock that works and is correct.  

18. What is a sufficient key-length for symmetric ciphers? (explain)
    Today 128 bit is fine, but if you want future proofing you can use 256 bit.

19. Why should you never use the same key for different algorithms? (explain)
    If one of the algorithms is broken, you would be able to retrieve the key from one and use that to decrypt the message in the other one.

20. What is a key-deriving key? (explain)
    A key that was created (derived) using a key. So like imagine you use a password to generate a new key that will be used to encrypt stuff with. 

21. How long should a key-deriving key be? (explain)
    The weakest link in a key-deriving key process is the base key (the password if continuing he example before). 
    The user should take care to have a long and complex enough password that it wont be brute forced. Hive Systems password table.

22. What is meant by “lifetime” for keys?
    The period during which a key is valid. When it expires, it wont be accepted anymore.

23. Can the lifetime concept capture more than “time”? (explain)
    Yes, you could have number of uses for example. 