Exercises 05: Mobile Security – 1G to 4G
You should explain meticulously for all the “what is” questions.
You may have to look beyond the lecture notes to answer all the questions.

0. What was the name of the 1G system used in Norway?
    Nordisk MobilTelefonsystem (NMT). Verdens første helautomatiske mobiltelefonisystem.

1. What is “metering?
    Metering the process of measuring and recording usage on a mobile network. 

2. What is “GAFA” (or “GAMA”)?
    Big tech acronym:
        Google
        Amazon
        Facebook / Meta
        Apple
    Other famous example: FAANG

3. What does the SIM acronym mean?
    Subscriber Identity Module 

4. What does “tamper resistant” mean in practice?
    Tamper resistance means making it more difficult to tamper with (gain unauthorised access or modifications) the item in question. 
    Tamper systems can also serve as a warning system to indicate something has been tampered with, like for example medical bottles having a tamper seal on them.
    Chips can have hardware intended for tamper resistance. 

5. What is “roaming”?
    Roaming is when a mobile device connects to a network outside its native network. You will often encounter this when traveling abroad.
    Norwegian networks obviously wont be accessible abroad, so you have to use a network from there, which will route your usage to your provider. 

6. What does the MS acronym stand for?
    Mobile Station. Mobile station refers to the group of all the components you need to communicate with a mobile network.
    A modern mobile phone would be considered a "mobile station", as it features everything you need. 
    Here im assuming you have a valid SIM installed. A phone does not neccesarily come with a SIM of course.

7. What does the PLMN acronym stand for?
    Public Land Mobile Network. PLMN refers to the mobile network owned and ran by an operator. This is the infrastructure your phone connects to.
    From wikipedia:
        A PLMN typically consists of several cellular technologies like GSM/2G, UMTS/3G, LTE/4G, NR/5G, offered by a single operator within a given country, often referred to as a cellular network.
        A PLMN is identified by a globally unique PLMN code, which consists of a MCC (Mobile Country Code) and MNC (Mobile Network Code).
        The IMSI, which usually identifies a SIM, USIM or eSIM for one subscriber, typically starts with the PLMN code. For example, an IMSI belonging to the PLMN 262-33 would look like 262330000000001.

8. What is a “core network” and what does RAN stand for?
    Radio Access Network - the towers and such whos job is to wirelessly connect your phone to the operators network (the core network). 
    The core network is, as the name implies, the core system for the network provider. This is where they handle authentication, routing, usage, etc.

9. What are the main assets as seen from the subscriber’s perspective? 
    (there are more aspects than those outlined in the lecture…)
        Some things subscribers typically care about:
            Privacy and confidentiality
            Fraud
            Having service everywhere
            Being sure the network is trustworthy
            Message integrity
            Device sovereignty 

10. Why didn’t one derive session keys in NMT?
    NMT was designed for an era that was very differnt from now. Phones were analog and we didnt have well established security standards (threat models).
    Therefore, the NMT system did not really have much in ways of security. And since it was analog, it couldnt support encryption in this way. 

11. Which generation does LTE belong to?
    LTE was designed to be a transition generation between 3G and 4G. 
    From wikipedia:
        It is considered to be a "transitional" 4G technology, and is therefore also referred to as 3.95G as a step above 3G.

12. What is an MTX?
    Mobile Telephone Exchange. The central switching node that handled incoming calls and routed them where they needed to go and allat.

13. What was ISDN?
    Integrated Services Digital Network. 
    From wikipedia:
        A set of communication standards for simultaneous digital transmission of voice, video, data, and other network services over the digitalised circuits of the public switched telephone network.

14. What was TCAP?
    Transaction Capabilities Application Part. Lets network elements communicate and exchange transactions amongst each other. 
    Its a messenger layer carrying messages between network systems

15. What was SS7, and why is it still a security liability?
    Signalling System No. 7.
    From wikipedia:
        A set of telephony signaling protocols developed in the 1970s that is used to setup and teardown telephone calls on most parts of the global public switched telephone network (PSTN). 
            Teardown: A sequence of events used to disconnect a telephone call and return to the ready state for the next call setup. 
    Why still security liability?
        From wikipedia:
            SS7 has been shown to have several security vulnerabilities, allowing location tracking of callers, interception of voice data, intercept two-factor authentication keys, and possibly the delivery of spyware to phones.
                Known about for a long time:
                    In 2008, several SS7 vulnerabilities were published that permitted the tracking of mobile phone users
                    In 2014, the media reported a protocol vulnerability of SS7 by which anyone can track the movements of mobile phone users from virtually anywhere in the world with a success rate of approximately 70%.
            Recent example: 
                In 2026, the Iranian government exploited security vulnerabilities in SS7 to locate US military personnel during the 2026 Iran war.

16. What is the IMSI?
    International Mobile Subscriber Identity number. Used to uniquely identify every user of a mobile network. Kind of like an SSN but for phones.
    The subscriber's permanent identity in the mobile network is such a number.
    IMSI numbers should be kept secret. If you know the number of your target, you can track them using it. 

17. What is a “triplet”?
    Triplet of parameters. The network gives it to the authenticator.
    Has 3 things:
        RAND: Network challenge
        SRES: The expected signed response
        Kc: Cipher key.
    The authenticator sends the challenge to the phone, the SIM computes the challenge. If the challenge is sucessful the SIM is authenticated.
    If success, the Kc is used to encrypt the connection. 

18. What is the A3/A8 algorithms used for?
    From wikipedia:
        The COMP128 algorithms are implementations of the A3 and A8 functions defined in the GSM standard. 
        A3 is used to authenticate the mobile station to the network. 
        A8 is used to generate the session key used by A5 to encrypt the data transmitted between the mobile station and the BTS.

19. What is MAP?
    Mobile Application Part is an SS7 protocol. It is a protocol specification.
    From wikipedia:
        Provides an application layer for the various nodes in GSM and UMTS mobile core networks and GPRS core networks to communicate with each other in order to provide services to users. 
    MAP is not an actual *thing*, its not hardware or anything. Its a description of how things should work for like standardisation or whatever.

20. What is a BTS?
    Base Transceiver Station.
    From wikipedia:
        A piece of equipment that facilitates wireless communication between user equipment and a network. 
            UE examples: Mobile phones, computers with wireless Internet connectivity, or antennas mounted on buildings.
    In a BTW tower for example: 
        The BTS is the radio network equipment doing the actual transceiver work.

21. Between which two termination points does one have user data confidentiality in GSM?
    Between the MS (Mobile Station, so like your phone) and the BTS (Base Transceiver Station).
    This is not very much, its only the wireless part between your phone and the reciever.

22. How big is a BLOCK in GSM (for the A5 cipher)?
    The BLOCK is 114-bits.

23. What is the “false-basestation” problem?
    The network authenticates the subscriber, but the subscriber dod not really authenticate the network. 
    There was little to prevent someone from setting up a fake base station, hoping to lure devices to connect.
    While "modern" (3G and up) helped mitigate this issue with mutual authentication systems, such an attack is still a concern.
        From wikipedia:  
            The 3G wireless standard offers some risk mitigation due to mutual authentication required from both the handset and the network.
            However, sophisticated attacks may be able to downgrade 3G and LTE to non-LTE network services which do not require mutual authentication.
    Even though 2G and older are the source of much issues here, dropping backwards compatibility with 2G is not neccesarily viable.

24. What does the acronym IMT stand for? (and which body is responsible for it?)
    International Mobile Telecommunications. Requirements issued by the ITU Radiocommunication Sector.
        Who are ITU-R? From wikipedia:
            The ITU Radiocommunication Sector (ITU-R) is one of the three sectors of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and is responsible for radio communications.
        Requirements issued by the ITU-R of the ITU in 2008 for what is marketed as 4G mobile phone and Internet access service.
    A gatekeeping definition for the 4G label. So when a provder says 4G, they actually mean a system that fits the IMT requirements for that generation.

25. What does the acronym UMTS stand for?
    Universal Mobile Telecommunications System. UMTS is the 3G standard developed by 3GPP. 
    UMTS is the 3G successor to GSM.  

26. What is KASUMI?
    From wikipedia:
        KASUMI is a block cipher used in UMTS, GSM, and GPRS mobile communications systems. 
            In UMTS, KASUMI is used in the confidentiality (f8) and integrity algorithms (f9) with names UEA1 and UIA1, respectively.
            In GSM, KASUMI is used in the A5/3 and A5/4 key stream generator and in GPRS in the GEA3 and GEA4 key stream generator.

27. What does the acronym AV stand for?
    Authentication Vector. A set of values used by the network and subscriber to authenticate each other.

28. What are the elements of a UMTS AV?
    RAND: the random challenge
    XRES: the expected response
    CK: cipher key
    IK: integrity key
    AUTN: authentication token for the network
        The network uses these elements to construct a challenge for the SIM to solve. If the SIM solves the challenge, we can authenticate them. 

29. What is a USIM?
    Universal Subscriber Identity Module. 
    When they introduced UMTS (3G), they split what the name "SIM" meant into two parts.
        UICC = the physical card.
        USIM = the software on that card for 3G and later networks.
    From wikipedia:
        This split was necessary because UMTS introduced a new application, the universal subscriber identity module (USIM). 
        The USIM brought, among other things, security improvements like mutual authentication and longer encryption keys, and an improved address book.

30. When a USIM processes a challenge, why does it have to run the f5-function before the other f-functions?

31. How long (in bits) is the RES in UMTS?
    From 3GPP document:
        The authentication response (RES) shall have a variable length of 4‑16 octets.
    An octet is a byte, so 4*8 to 16*8 bits -> therefore, 32 to 128 bits. 
    Standard size seems to be 64 bits. 

32. How long are the CK and IK keys?
    From 3GPP document:
        CK:
            The cipher key (CK) shall have a length of 128 bits.
        IK:
            The integrity key (IK) shall have a length of 128 bits.

33. What is an RNC?
    Radio Network Controller. The RNC is the part that controls the Node Bs (Node B = basically a radio tower). 
    It coordinates the tower and its resources.
    It controls multiple towers.

34. What is the f8-function used for?
??
    f8 is used to generate the ciphering key for UMTS.
    It turns the secret key and random challenge into a key called CK. That CK is then used to encrypt the radio connection traffic.

35. What is a “null cipher”?
   Ciphering mode where no encryption is used. 
   From wikipedia: 
    In modern cryptography, null encryption (or selecting null cipher or NONE cipher) is choosing not to use encryption in a system where various encryption options are offered.

36. What does the acronyms LTE and EPS stand for?
    LTE: Long Term Evolution
    EPS: Evolved Packet System

37. What is the “user plane” and the “control plane”?

38. What is the basestation in 3G called?

39. What is the basestation in 4G called?

40. Why was the UICC/USIM for 3G retained in 4G?

41. What is an MME?

42. What is the ASME?

43. What is the basis for deriving the KASME key?

44. What is the “EPS AV” and which elements does it contain?

45. What is a “security context”?

46. Which algorithm is used for key derivation in 4G?

47. Access security in 4G has omissions/weak parts, but what is the biggest security challenge for 4G?

48. What is smishing?

49. Provide some examples that the App Store or Google Play are unsafe.
