Exercises 06: AEAD
0. What are the options for combining data confidentiality and data integrity?
    Encrypt-and-MAC  -> Encrypt-and-Authenticate 
    Encrypt-then-MAC -> Encrypt-then-Authenticate 
    MAC-then-Encrypt -> Authenticate-then-Encrypt 

1. What is Encrypt-and-Authenticate?
        Encrypt your plaintext and MAC your plaintext -> Send both to the recipient. Recipient decrypts the plaintext, MACs it, and then compares them. 
    • Are there any advantages or drawbacks to authenticate (MAC) the plaintext?
        They can be parallelized.
        From the book:
            Encrypt- and-MAC is the least secure MAC and cipher composition because even a secure MAC could leak information on P, making P easier to recover. 
            This can be fixed relatively easily tho.

2. What is Encrypt-then-Authenticate?
        Encrypt the plaintext -> MAC the ciphertext using the key to create a tag -> send both to recipient. Recipient MACs the ciphertext using the key to confirm if its correct.
    • Are there any advantages or drawbacks to authenticate (MAC) the ciphertext?
        Since you check first before doing decryption, you dont have to worry about spending effort decrypting a corrupted message.
        Since the MAC requires a key, an attacker cant fake a message easily, which makes it harder to transmit malicious data.

3. What is Authenticate-then-Encrypt?
        MAC the plaintext -> encrypt plaintext || MAC -> recipient decrypts and splits the data into plaintext || MAC to check.
    • Are there any advantages or drawbacks to encrypting the tag?
        You need to decrypt before you can check if its corrupted or not, so you can waste processing effort.
        From the book:
            it hides the plaintext’s authentication tag, thus preventing the tag from leaking information on the plaintext.

4. What is the AD in AEAD?
    AE -> Authenticated Encryption
    AD -> Associated Data

5. What kind of protection (if any) is there for the AD?
    Integrity Protection
    From the book:
        An AEAD algorithm allows you to attach cleartext data to a ciphertext in such a way that if the cleartext data is corrupted, the authentication tag won’t validate, and the ciphertext won’t decrypt. 

6. AEAD: What happens if the tag is invalid?
     If the tag is invalid, the plaintext is discarded. 

7. Are AEAD used in any important cases?
    From the book:
        Nearly all authenticated ciphers in use today support associated data.
    Some examples from google:
        TLS 1.3, HTTPS, Signal and other secure messaging systems, VPNs

8. Can you mention any NIST defined AEAD cipher modes?
    From the book: 
        AES-GCM is a NIST standard (SP 800-38D)
        AES-GCM is based on the AES algorithm, and the Galois counter mode (GCM) of operation is essentially a tweak of the CTR mode that incorporates a small and efficient component to compute an authentication tag. 

9. Is AEAD supported by the python cryptography module (OpenSSL)?
    Yes.

10. What is GHASH?
    From google:
        GHASH is the authentication function in AES-GCM. It takes the associated data and ciphertext, mixes them with a secret hash key H, and produces a value that is XORed with AES(K, N||0) to form the final tag.
    From the book: 
        GHASH uses polynomial notation to multiply each ciphertext block with the authentication key H. 

11. Could you use GHASH instead of SHA-256? (would it be wise?)
    No. GHASH takes a key, SHA-256 does not. Its intended for a different use case.
    It would not be wise.

12. Which NIST AEAD algorithm do you think is most important (why?)?
    AES-CGM. Its efficient, standardised, and in use everywhere.

13. How long is the IV/Nonce in AES-GCM?
    Can be any, but its common to use 12 bytes lenght.

14. What is the authoritative reference for AES-GCM-SIV?
    According to google:
        Gueron, S., et al. AES-GCM-SIV: Nonce Misuse-Resistant Authenticated Encryption. Request for Comments RFC 8452, Internet Engineering Task Force, Apr. 2019. IETF, https://doi.org/10.17487/RFC8452.

15. Can you imagine why the IV in AES-GCM-SIV is 12 bytes (= 96 bits)?
    Did some reasearch on it. 
        AES blocks are 16 bytes each, and GCM-SIV splits that into 12 byte for IV and 4 byte for counter. If you do more than 12 bytes it has to hash the size down which introduces potential collisions and takes extra processing effort.
        If its 12, you just need to append it. 