Exercise 10: Access security in 5G
You should explain meticulously for all the “what is” questions. You may have to look beyond the lecture notes to answer all the questions.

0. What is the “eSIM” and which form factor (ff) does it have?

1. What are the security differences between USIM and eSIM?

2. What is the difference between eSIM and iSIM? Does it matter?

3. Network functions (google them to find more info) and security:
    • What is the UDM network function?
    • What is the SEPP network function?
    • What is the AUSF network function?
    • What is the SEAF network function?
    • What is the ARPF network function?
    • What is the SIDF network function?

4. What is “subscriber identity confidentiality”?

5. How did the “TMSI” scheme help to protect against tracking?

6. Why wasn’t the TMSI scheme sufficient against active adversaries?

7. In SUCI (ECIES), one of the DH key-pairs are (more or less) permanent while the other is only used once.
    • Which key-pair (HPLMN or UE) is permanent, and which is ephemeral?
    • What is advantage of this arrangement?

8. What is SUPI and what does it mean that it is “multi-modal”?

9. What is SUCI, and why is the “Home Network Identifier” needed?

10. SUCI contains a “public key” – which public key is that and who issued it?

11. There are two anchor keys – which are those and to which network function do they belong?

12. Between which elements are the basic challenge-response?

13. What part does the USIM (eSIM/iSIM) play in the 5G-AKA protocol?

14. Which part does the ME do?

15. Which of the 3G (“MILENAGE”) cryptographic functions are still needed in 5G AKA?

16. What security services are handled by TLS in the core network?

17. Why is there a need for authorization/access control in the 5G core network?

18. Which protocol is used for delegation of access rights in the 5G core network?

19. What is NESAS, and what authority manages the NESAS arrangements?

20. What is SECAM and SCAS?

21. What is specified in TS 33.517?

22. Who are Anand R. Prasad and Alf Zugenmaier? (read the River_3GPP_5G_Security.pdf paper)